notebooks/README.md, before:

# Notebooks 

In this folder we share notebooks with example use cases of GMM-MI, as well as to reproduce all results from the paper. Results are usually stored in [`results`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/notebooks/results), and figures in (you guess it) [`figures`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/notebooks/figures). Configurations files to share the parameters across different experiments can be found in `*.yml` files. The folder [`MI_synthetic_datasets`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/notebooks/MI_synthetic_datasets) contains the true value of MI for the synthetic datasets found in [`gmm_mi/data`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/gmm_mi/data). The folder [`mine_pytorch`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/notebooks/mine-pytorch) contains a version of the MINE estimator implementation available [at this repository](https://github.com/gtegner/mine-pytorch).

## List of available notebooks

- [0_calculate_MI_synthetic_datasets](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/0_calculate_MI_synthetic_datasets.ipynb): calculate MI for all the synthetic datasets found in `gmm_mi/data`.
- [1_MI_D3_significance](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/1_MI_D3_significance.ipynb): residual analysis for a dataset with 3 components, D3. Left panel of Fig. 2 in the paper.
- [2_MI_D3p_significance](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/2_MI_D3p_significance.ipynb): residual analysis for another dataset with 3 components, D3', where the components are more separated.
- [3_MI_D5_significance](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/3_MI_D5_significance.ipynb): residual analysis for a dataset with 5 components, D5. Middle panel of Fig. 2 in the paper.
- [4_MI_D5_significance](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/4_MI_D5p_significance.ipynb): residual analysis for a dataset with 5 components, D5'. This is identical to D5, but one component is shifted to the right. Right panel of Fig. 2 in the paper.
- [5_Gaussian_comparison](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/5_Gaussian_comparison.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI, KSG and MINE estimators on a Gaussian distribution with varying level of correlation. Top panel of Fig. 1 in the paper.
- [6_gamma_exp_comparison](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/6_gamma_exp_comparison.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI, KSG and MINE estimators on a gamma-exponential distribution  with varying $\alpha$. Middle panel of Fig. 1 in the paper.
- [7_weinman_exp_comparison](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/7_weinman_exp_comparison.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI, KSG and MINE estimators on a Weinman exponential distribution with varying $\alpha$. Bottom panel of Fig. 1 in the paper.
- [8_boostrap_comparison](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/8_boostrap_comparison.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI, KSG and MINE estimators when performing bootstrap to obtain the full MI distribution on a bivariate Gaussian dataset. Fig. 3 in the paper.

- [10_cosmology_IVE](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/10_cosmology_IVE.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI and KDE on cosmological data coming from [Lucie-Smith et al. (2022)](https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.105.103533). Fig. 5 in the paper.

Commit message:

Complete notebook with 3D shapes application

notebooks/README.md, after:

# Notebooks 

In this folder we share notebooks with example use cases of GMM-MI, as well as to reproduce all results from the paper. Results are usually stored in [`results`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/notebooks/results), and figures in (you guess it) [`figures`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/notebooks/figures). Configurations files to share the parameters across different experiments can be found in `*.yml` files. The folder [`MI_synthetic_datasets`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/notebooks/MI_synthetic_datasets) contains the true value of MI for the synthetic datasets found in [`gmm_mi/data`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/gmm_mi/data). The folder [`mine_pytorch`](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/tree/main/notebooks/mine-pytorch) contains a version of the MINE estimator implementation available [at this repository](https://github.com/gtegner/mine-pytorch).

## List of available notebooks

- [0_calculate_MI_synthetic_datasets](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/0_calculate_MI_synthetic_datasets.ipynb): calculate MI for all the synthetic datasets found in `gmm_mi/data`.
- [1_MI_D3_significance](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/1_MI_D3_significance.ipynb): residual analysis for a dataset with 3 components, D3. Left panel of Fig. 2 in the paper.
- [2_MI_D3p_significance](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/2_MI_D3p_significance.ipynb): residual analysis for another dataset with 3 components, D3', where the components are more separated.
- [3_MI_D5_significance](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/3_MI_D5_significance.ipynb): residual analysis for a dataset with 5 components, D5. Middle panel of Fig. 2 in the paper.
- [4_MI_D5_significance](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/4_MI_D5p_significance.ipynb): residual analysis for a dataset with 5 components, D5'. This is identical to D5, but one component is shifted to the right. Right panel of Fig. 2 in the paper.
- [5_Gaussian_comparison](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/5_Gaussian_comparison.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI, KSG and MINE estimators on a Gaussian distribution with varying level of correlation. Top panel of Fig. 1 in the paper.
- [6_gamma_exp_comparison](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/6_gamma_exp_comparison.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI, KSG and MINE estimators on a gamma-exponential distribution  with varying $\alpha$. Middle panel of Fig. 1 in the paper.
- [7_weinman_exp_comparison](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/7_weinman_exp_comparison.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI, KSG and MINE estimators on a Weinman exponential distribution with varying $\alpha$. Bottom panel of Fig. 1 in the paper.
- [8_boostrap_comparison](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/8_boostrap_comparison.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI, KSG and MINE estimators when performing bootstrap to obtain the full MI distribution on a bivariate Gaussian dataset. Fig. 3 in the paper.
- [9_3D_shapes](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/9_3D_shapes.ipynb): calculation of MI between continuous and categorical variables, applied to the 3D shapes dataset. Fig. 4 in the paper.
- [10_cosmology_IVE](https://github.com/dpiras/MI_estimation/blob/main/notebooks/10_cosmology_IVE.ipynb): comparison between GMM-MI and KDE on cosmological data coming from [Lucie-Smith et al. (2022)](https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.105.103533). Fig. 5 in the paper.
